The sky was yellow as brass, not yet hidden by the smoke
from the chimney stacks. Behind the roofs of the factory the
radiance was especially bright. The sun must be just rising. I
looked at my watch; not eight o'clock. A quarter of an hour
too early.
Still I opened the gate, and put the petrol pump in readiness. There was always a car or two passing at that hour wanting a fill.
Suddenly I heard behind me a harsh, high-pitched
squeaking—like the sound of a rusty hoist being turned somewhere down under the earth. I stood still and listened. I
walked back across the yard to the workshop and cautiously
opened the door.
A ghost—stumbling about in the gloom! It had a dirty
white cloth wound about its head, its skirt was hitched up to
give its knees clearance; it had a blue apron, a pair of thick
slippers, and was wielding a broom; it weighed around fourteen stone, and was in fact our charwoman, Matilda Stoss.
I stood watching her. With all the grace of a hippopotamus, she made her way staggering among the radiators,
singing in a hollow voice as she went "the Song of the Bold
Hussar." On the bench by the window stood two cognac
bottles, one of them almost empty. Last night they had been
full. I had forgotten to lock them away
The singing stopped; the broom dropped to the floor. The
beatific smile died away. Now it was my turn to be the ghost.
"Holy Jesus!" exclaimed Matilda, staring at me with
bleary eyes. "I wasn't expecting you yet."
"That doesn't surprise me. Did it taste good?"
"Sure and it did. But this is so awkward, Herr Lohkamp."
She wiped her hand across her mouth. "I just can't
understand—"
"Come, Matilda, that's an exaggeration. You're only tight
—full as a tick, eh?"
She maintained her balance with difficulty and
stood there blinking like an old owl. Gradually her mind became clear. Resolutely she took a step forward.
"Man is human, Herr Lohkamp, after all. . . I only
smelled it at first . . . and then I took just one little nip, because well, you know, I always have had a weak stomach . . .
and then . . . then I think the Devil must have got hold of me.
Anyway, you have no right to lead an old woman into temptation, leaving good bottles standing about like that. . . ."
It was not the first time I had caught her so. She used to
come to us for two hours every morning to clean up the workshop; and though one might leave as much money lying
around as one liked she would never disturb it—but schnapps
she could smell out as far off as a rat a slice of bacon.
I held up the bottles. "Naturally! You've left the customers' cognac. . . . But the good stuff, Herr Köster's own—you've
polished it all off."
A grin appeared on her weather-beaten face. "Trust me,
Herr Lohkamp; I'm a connoisseur! But you won't tell, Herr
Lohkamp—and me a poor widow?"
She unpinned her skirt. "Then I'd better be going. If Herr
Köster should catch me . . ." She threw up her hands.
I went to the cupboard and opened it. "Matilda. . . ."
She came waddling along. I held up a rectangular brown
bottle.
Protesting, she held up her hands.
"It wasn't me," she said. "Honour bright, it wasn't, Herr
Lohkamp. I didn't even smell it!"
"You don't even know what it is, I suppose?" said I, filling
a glass.
"No?" she replied, licking her lips. "Rum. Stone Age
Jamaica."
"Excellent! Then how about a glass?"
"Me?" She started back. "This is too much, Herr Lohkamp! This is heaping coals of fire on my head. Here's old
Stoss goes and mops up all your cognac on the quiet and then
you treat her to a rum on top of it! You're a saint, Herr Lohkamp, that's what you are! I'll see myself in my grave before
I touch a drop of it."
"You're quite sure, Matilda?" said I, making to drink it
myself.
"Well, all right, then," said she swiftly, seizing the glass.
"One must take the good as it comes. Even though one
doesn't understand. Good health! It's not your birthday, I
suppose?"
"More or less, Matilda. A good guess."
"No, not really?" She seized my hand. "Many happy returns! And lots of dough, Herr Lohkamp. . . . Why, I'm all of a
quiver. . . . I must have another to celebrate that. I'm as fond
of you as if you were my own son!"
