We are at rest five miles behind the front. Yesterday we were relieved, and now our bellies are
full of beef and haricot beans. We are satisfied and at peace. Each man has another mess-tin full
for the evening; and, what is more, there is a double ration of sausage and bread. That puts a man
in fine trim. We have not had such luck as this for a long time. The cook with his carroty head is
begging us to eat; he beckons with his ladle to every one that passes, and spoons him out a great
dollop. He does not see how he can empty his stew-pot in time for coffee. Tjaden and Müller have
produced two washbasins and had them filled up to the brim as a reserve. In Tjaden this is
voracity, in Muller it is foresight. Where Tjaden puts it all is a mystery, for he is and always will be
as thin as a rake. What's more important still is the issue of a double ration of smokes. Ten cigars,
twenty cigarettes, and two quids of chew per man; now that is decent. I have exchanged my
chewing tobacco with Katczinsky for his cigarettes, which means I have forty altogether. That's
enough for a day.
It is true we have no right to this windfall. The Prussian is not so generous. We have only a
miscalculation to thank for it.
Fourteen days ago we had to go up and relieve the front line. It was fairly quiet on our sector, so
the quartermaster who remained in the rear had requisitioned the usual quantity of rations and
provided for the full company of one hundred and fifty men. But on the last day an astonishing
number of English heavies opened up on us with high-explosive, drumming ceaselessly on our
position, so that we suffered severely and came back only eighty strong.
Last night we moved back and settled down to get a good sleep for once: Katczinsky is right
when he says it would not be such a bad war if only one could get a little more sleep. In the line
we have had next to none, and fourteen days is a long time at one stretch.
It was noon before the first of us crawled out of our quarters. Half an hour later every man had
his mess-tin and we gathered at the cookhouse, which smelt greasy and nourishing. At the head
of the queue of course were the hungriest-little Albert Kropp, the clearest thinker among us and
therefore only a lance-corporal; Müller, who still carries his school textbooks with him, dreams of
examinations, and during a bombardment mutters propositions in physics; Leer, who wears a full
beard and has a preference for the girls from officers' brothels. He swears that they are obliged by
an army order to wear silk chemises and to bathe before entertaining guests of the rank of
captain and upwards. And as the fourth, myself, Paul Baumer. And four are nineteen years of
age, and all four joined up from the same class as volunteers for the war.