What is still left of Platoon is quartered in a stretch of battered trench behind the line, and most of them are dozing.

  "Funny sort of shell " says Jupp suddenly.

  "What do you mean?" asks Ferdinand Kosole, sitting up.

  "Use your ears!" answers Jupp.

  Kosole puts a hand to his ear and listens. We also listen into the darkness. But there is nothing audible beyond the dull rumour of gun-fire and the high piping of the shells. From the right sounds the rattle of machine-guns and now and then a cry. But all these we have known some years now; there is nothing in that to make a new song about.

  Kosole looks at Jupp suspiciously.

  "It's stopped now, of course," says Jupp, by way of defending himself.

  Kosole looks him over once more, appraisingly. Jupp remains unperturbed, so he turns away, muttering: "It's the rumble in your own hungry guts; that's all your shells are. Best thing you can do is get an eyeful of sleep." He knocks up a sort of earthen headrest and stretches out, disposing himself cautiously so that his boots shall not slip down into the water. "God, and there's the missus and a bed for two at home!" he murmurs, his eyes already closed.

  "Somebody else is in it by now, I dare say," retorts Jupp out of his corner.

  Kosole opens one eye and gives him a hard look. For a moment it seems as if he meant to get up again. "Don't you be too funny, you poor fish!" And he is snoring already.

  Jupp signs to me to crawl over to him. I step across Adolf Bethke's legs and sit down beside him. With a sidelong glance at the snoring figure he says sourly: "The likes of that don't even know what education is."

  Jupp was a clerk in a solicitor's office in Cologne before the war. And though he has been soldiering three years now, he still feels himself superior, and in most curious wise sets great store on education out here at the Front. What that means exactly, he does not know himself, of course; but more than all else that he ever heard tell of in the days gone by, the word Education has stayed with him; and to that he clings, as it were a plank in the sea, that he shall not go under. Everybody has something of the sort: this one a wife, another his business, a third his boots, Valentin Laher his schnapps and Tjaden the hope of tasting broad beans and bacon once more.

  On the other hand there is nothing so irritates Kosole as that very word, Education. He always connects it some way or another with the idea of high collars, and for him that is enough. Even now it has its effect. Without interrupting his sleep: "Bloody pen-pusher!" says he gruffly.

  Jupp shakes his head, resigned and pitying. We sit on in silence a while, side by side to warm ourselves. The night is wet and cold, clouds are driving overhead, and it rains off and on. Then we take up the waterproof on which we are sitting and, while the rain lasts hang it over pur heads.

  Along the skyline are the flashes of gun-fire. One feels that over there must be a region a little less cold, it looks so cosy. Like gaily coloured and silver flowers the flares spring up above the lightning flashes of the artillery. Big and red the moon swims in the wet air over the ruins of a farm.

  "Think we're going home?" whispers Jupp.

  I shrug my shoulders. "The rumour is —— "

  Jupp sighs aloud. "A warm room and a sofa, and going out of nights—can you picture it still?"

  "I tried on my civvies last time I was on leave," I say meditatively, "but they're ever so much too small for me now—I'll have to get new things." How marvellous that all sounds here—civvies, a sofa, the evening—but it brings strange thoughts too—like black coffee, when sometimes it tastes too much of the tin and rust of the dixie, and one coughs it up again, hot and choking.

  Jupp is picking his nose absently. "Shop windows—and cafés—and women—oh, boy!"

  "Ach, man, you just be thankful you're back here out of the shit for a bit," I say, and blow into my frozen hands.

  "That's true." Jupp draws the waterproof up over his thin, bent shoulders. "What'll you do when you get out of this?"

  I laugh. "I? I'll have to go back to school again, I suppose. Willy and Albert and I—and even Ludwig over there, too," I say, pointing back to where someone is lying before a dugout entrance, under two greatcoats.

  "Good Lord! But you won't do that, surely?" exclaims Jupp.

  "I don't know. Probably have to," I reply, and feel furious, without knowing why.

  There is a movement under the greatcoats. A pale, thin face lifts up and groans softly. It is my schoolmate, Lieutenant Ludwig Breyer, our platoon commander. He has had diarrhoea for weeks—it is dysentery, of course, but he does not want to go back into hospital. He would sooner stay here with us, for we are all waiting now in hopes of peace; then we shall be able to take him back with us at once— The hospitals are all full to overflowing, no one is properly looked after there, and once a man lies down on it, he is only so much nearer to being dead. Men die all around one. It gets on a fellow's nerves, alone there among it all, and before he knows where he is he has made another himself.—Max Weil, our stretcher bearer, has given Breyer a sort of fluid plaster to eat, so as to cement up his bowels and stay him for a bit. But even so he has his trousers down twenty and thirty times a day.